So Burnett and I had a great week along with Pastor Britt and Gayle and some other friends.
We went out to the lighthouse and spent the week out there.
And that was a really great time.
So thanks for letting us get some time away.
Thanks for Pastor Lance taking care of preaching last week.
But it was just a really, really wonderful time getting away.
The first time we ever went out there was with our kids.
So our oldest son is,
28?
Our youngest.
28, see?
I got that right.
He had his third birthday at the lighthouse.
Back then, they would let you take really young kids out.
I think now you have to be like seven or nine or something for going out.
But that was a long time ago.
And back then, of course, you had to take long storybooks to read the kids at night.
And one of the books that we always enjoyed with our kids, and maybe you know this one, is cloudy with a chance of meatballs.
It's the folks that live in the town of Chuan Swallow, and it turns out that all the weather fronts in the town of Chuan Swallow are food.
And so it will like hail pancakes and rain syrup in the morning for breakfast.
And it goes on to the day, and then they run into some extreme weather events that eventually make the town uninhabitable because of the giant pancakes that are landing on them.
So that was cloudy with a chance of meatballs.
We have been working our way through the story of the children of Israel.
and their journey from slavery in Egypt to the promised land and kind of making parallels between that and our journey as followers of Jesus as we move through this life.
And I think scripture uses those parallels often that we have been brought out of a place of slavery and that we are now on a journey with Jesus and ahead of us is the promised land in eternal home with Jesus.
And so we've been looking at various episodes along the journey that Israel had.
I've been encouraging you to keep a travel log.
What I mean by that is, do some journaling.
Read the story on your own and prayerfully say, Lord, how do I learn?
How do I learn?
How do I gain something from this from my own life?
I hope you're doing that.
The story I want to talk about today is kind of the Israelite version of Cloudy with the Chance of Meatballs.
We're going to talk about the miracle of manna today.
and how Israel was provided for in the wilderness with literally food from heaven.
To give you some context, at this point Israel is about a month and a half into their journey.
And what has led them up to this journey first was their cry for deliverance from slavery in Egypt.
They had been crying out for that.
And then they saw how God provided.
He sent Moses, and of course there were those 10 terrible plagues that fell on Egypt that finally
forced Pharaoh's hand to let them go.
Then they witnessed that God led them by this fiery cloud.
We talked about that and the imagery there of, we see God's Holy Spirit leading and guiding in our lives.
There was this visible manifestation that God's power was with them, that he was the one who was leading them in the way that they should go.
No sooner had that journey started.
then they found themselves trapped between the Red Sea and Pharaoh's pursuing army, seemingly with no way out.
Turns out that Pharaoh, having let them go, had kind of a buyer's remorse, or maybe we should say an emancipator's remorse, as he saw he had just released his entire workforce.
And so the people cry out to Moses and they say, why did you bring us out here to die?
because death seems certain with Pharaoh's army closing in.
But then, as we talked about, they are miraculously delivered.
God parts the waters and lets them pass through.
The last week, Pastor Lance preached on one of their first water stops in that desert journey.
One that turned out initially to be deeply disappointing because the water was bitter.
It was undrinkable.
And the people again cried out to Moses and they said,
Why did you bring us here to die?
This is a recurring theme in their lives.
Whenever something goes wrong, they're pretty sure they're going to die.
But once again, God provided that miracle that rendered the bitter water sweet and drinkable.
So now we're finding them traveling on from that oasis, but they are running low on supplies.
Do you want to guess what their response is?
They cry out to Moses and they say, why did you bring this out here to die?
This is just their response to everything, which I think is the textbook definition of being a slow learner.
And yet despite their grumbling, God once again provides.
And so we're gonna pick it up there.
This is Exodus chapter 16, verses four and five.
Then the Lord said to Moses, behold, I'm about to reign bread from heaven for you and the people should go out and gather a day's portion every day that I may test them.
whether they will walk in my law or not.
On the sixth day, when they prepare what they bring in, it will be twice as much as they gather daily.
Now I'm gonna say at the outset that there was more provided for them than just this miracle bread.
There's also quail.
Each evening quail appeared, each morning the miracle bread appeared.
I wanna focus this morning just on the bread aspect of this.
I think it is maybe the harder of the two to understand,
And there were some very specific instructions given concerning it.
We're also going to see how it plays a significant role in later biblical history.
So what was this bread from heaven?
That is exactly the question that the people of Israel had when they first laid eyes on it.
When the people of Israel sought, they said to one another, what is it?
In fact, the name that they gave it is the Hebrew word man.
It wasn't called manna until it was translated into Greek.
Turns out that in Greek, the Greeks don't like words that end on consonants, so they added an A, and our English translations went ahead and just kept that.
So we get the word manna from this Hebrew word, man, and literally what the Hebrew translates to is, what is it?
That was the name they gave it, right?
Here's how it is described.
In the morning, do lay around the camp, and when the do had gone up, there was, on the face of the wilderness, a fine flake-like thing, fine as frost on the ground.
It was like coriander seed, white, and the taste of it was like wafers made with honey.
So it was a small frost-like flake with a sweet taste.
I thought about this, and you know what it was?
Tell me I'm not right.
All right.
So they get frosted flakes every morning for breakfast.
Now, what is more significant than the shape or the taste is the deeper test and lesson that was embedded within that miracle breakfast cereal, if you will.
Right off the top, the Lord tells Moses that there is a test embedded in this manna.
The Lord said to Moses, behold, I'm about to reign bread from heaven for you and the people should go out and gather a day's portion every day, that I may test them whether they will walk in my law or not.
Now as you read on about manna, you find out that there were rules attached to it.
There were some laws about the collecting of manna.
The Lord says that how the people respond to those rules is going to reveal something about the motivations and the priorities of their heart.
I think that is what God often is doing with his law.
It's not so much about the law as it is revealing the things that are deep in our hearts.
And our response to God reveals those things.
So what were the rules?
Well, the first rule was that they were to collect just what they needed for today.
This from Exodus 16.
Here's what the Lord's commanded, gather of it, each one of you, as much as he can eat, you shall take an omer according to the number of persons that each of you has in his tent.
So they have this kind of set amount in Omer that they click for each person.
And so maybe you're wondering, well, what is an Omer?
Now I had an uncle, Emma, but I think that's different.
So exit of 1636 actually tells us what an Omer is.
It says an Omer is the 10th part of an EFA.
So that clears that up.
OK. Best as we can tell, an Omer equals about two quarts.
So they were told to collect about two quarts per day.
Also they were told that there would be no leftovers and no hoarding.
Exodus 16, 19 Moses said to them, let no one leave any of it over till the morning.
So you collect it every day and you are to use what you've collected.
You're not supposed to try and keep the leftovers.
You're not to try and build up a stockpile of it.
Except there was one exception to this and that was on the Sabbath.
On the sixth day, so the day before the Sabbath, they gathered twice as much bread to Omer's each, and when all the leaders of the congregation came and told Moses, he said to them, this is what the Lord has commanded.
Tomorrow is a day of solemn rest, a holy Sabbath to the Lord, bake which you will bake and boil which you will boil, and all that is left over lay aside to be kept until morning.
So the only day that you could collect more than one day's supply was on the day before the Sabbath.
That was to allow you to rest.
There was this principle established from the time of creation of setting aside a regular time, a weekly time for rest, for contentment, for quietness.
And even in the giving of this miracle bread, the manna, God said, I still want you to have this day of rest.
Now there were some extra miracles attached to the manna.
This from Exodus 16, verses 17 and 18.
which tells us that everybody got an omer regardless of their gathering ability.
Take a look at this.
They gathered some more, some less, but when they measured it with an omer, whoever gathered much had nothing left over and whoever gathered little had no lack.
Isn't that interesting?
Now I don't think that means that laziness was rewarded.
Okay, this isn't the idea that the guy who's lazy and just doesn't want to go out and do anything, he still ends up with just as much as the guy who is working really hard.
I think really what it's saying is that both the weak and the strong, the young and the aged, were cared for equally.
And so the elderly person that maybe can't collect as much at the end of the day finds that they have as much as the young who were in good strength and could collect a lot.
So both the weak and the strong were equally cared for by God in collecting the manum.
Now there were people who tried to cheat the system as they're always are, and what they discovered if they did that is that they were stinkers and winners.
Moses said to them, let no one leave any of it over till the morning.
Some left part of it till the morning, and it bred worms and stink.
So,
Cheaters never win, right?
But again, they were allowed to double up on Fridays, right?
On the sixth day, they gathered twice as much.
Moses said to them, tomorrow's the day of solemn rest, all this leftover lay aside to be kept to mourning, and it did not stink, and there were no worms in it.
So if any other time during the week, you try to hold on to it, it's not gonna go well.
But the day before the Sabbath, you were allowed to collect twice as much.
Remember, God told Moses the outset that there was a test embedded in this gift of manna.
And the test was to see if the people would obey God's words.
So how did they do?
Well, we already know that there are quite a few folks who apparently tried to hoard the leftovers and they stink literally.
How about that double collection on the Sabbath?
Well, on seventh day, some of the people went out to gather, but they found none.
And the Lord said to Moses, how long will you refuse to keep my commandments and my laws?
These folks out there, you know, that didn't save anything the day before.
Or maybe they thought they could hoard even more of it on the Sabbath day.
He says, don't you people listen?
Didn't you hear what I told you?
There could be a couple reasons that folks were out hunting on the Sabbath.
Maybe they had failed to take advantage of the double portion the day before.
You know, every other day collecting extra had been a bad thing.
And so maybe despite they've been instructed, they just didn't believe there would actually be any different on Friday than it had been on Thursday.
Or maybe they had collected the double provision, but they were still back hoping to grab even more.
Either way, they weren't being obedient to what the Lord had told them.
It was either unbelief or it was greed.
So what is there for us to learn from manna?
Well, probably the most profound, well, yes, the most profound New Testament connection that was made to this story of manna was made by Jesus himself.
And it occurs in the aftermath of another miracle bread encounter.
Maybe you remember the story.
In John 6, we have the account
of Jesus feeding 5,000 people by blessing and breaking five small biscuits and a couple of small fish that had been donated out of a young boy's lunch.
And besides having their tummies filled, the crowd is exuberant because they see this miracle as proof positive that Jesus is the great prophet that has been long prophesied.
They are thrilled
to see their ancient prophecies being fulfilled and to say, this is the man who can care for us, who can meet our every need.
Because just think if he can do that with one little boy's lunch, just imagine the power he has to make all of our dreams come true.
John tells us that Jesus actually had to remove himself from the crowd.
He says that he went and he hit himself away from them to avoid
them trying to forcibly make him a king.
By the next morning, Jesus actually left the area.
He crossed the Sea of Galilee.
But as any camera shy celebrity can tell you, the fans will eventually find you.
And the people still excited, riled up, wanting to lay hands on this miracle worker and make him their king.
Sure enough, they finally find where he is gone.
And here is what he says to them.
Jesus replied, I tell you the truth.
You want to be with me because I fed you.
Not because you understood the miraculous signs.
See, that's important.
He's saying to them, what I did yesterday was not just about a free lunch.
What I did yesterday was a sign that should have pointed you to something greater that's happening, but you're not paying attention to the signs.
The reason you're here, the reason you're so excited is not because of great spiritual insight,
is because you want more free lunch.
But don't be so concerned about perishable things like food.
Spend your energy seeking the eternal life that the Son of Man can give you.
For God the Father has given me the seal of His approval.
Saying, the sign here isn't about the bread.
It's about who I am.
That's what you need to understand.
They replied,
We want to perform God's works too.
So what should we do?
Jesus told them, this is the only work God wants from you.
Believe in the one he has sent.
They answered, well, show us a miraculous sign if you want us to believe in you.
What can you do?
After all, our ancestors ate manna while they journeyed through the wilderness.
The scriptures say Moses gave them bread from heaven to eat.
You hear what they're doing.
They're just trying to bring the whole conversation right back to where they started.
Let's talk somewhere about free lunch.
You know, you want us to follow you.
That sounds great, but I think you should do a miracle.
Maybe like the one you did yesterday.
And you have a Bible verse to quote, to go with it, right?
Moses gave him bread from heaven.
So why don't you do that too?
Jesus said, I tell you the truth.
Moses didn't give you bread from heaven.
My father did.
And now he offers you the true bread from heaven.
The true bread of God is the one who comes down from heaven and gives life to the world.
Sir, they said, give us that bread every day.
But you know what they're still thinking?
They're still thinking about lunch.
Jesus replied, I am the bread of life.
Whoever comes to me will never be hungry again.
And whoever believes in me will never be thirsty.
If you know your Bible, you may recall that Jesus had a very similar conversation with a woman from Samaria on a very hot day.
The Samaritans were looked down on, they were hated by the Jews, a lot of cultural prejudice there.
So the fact that Jesus and the Jewish rabbi would even have a conversation with this woman was, went side of all the cultural norms.
But the conversation he had with her was not about bread, it was about water.
And here's what Jesus said.
Jesus worried as he was from his journey was sitting beside the well, a woman from Samaria came to draw water.
Jesus said to her, give me a drink.
The Samaritan woman said to him, how was it that you and Jew asked for a drink for me, a woman of Samaria?
For Jews have no dealings with Samaritans.
Jesus answered her, if you knew the gift of God and who it is that is saying to you, give me a drink, you would have asked Him and He would have given you living water.
Jesus said to her, everyone who drinks of this water will be thirsty again.
But whoever drinks of the water that I will give him will never be thirsty again.
The water that I will give him will become in him a spring of water welling up to eternal life.
Obviously, Jesus is talking about something more than just physical desires.
He's saying there's something even deeper in the human being than hunger and thirst.
for bread and water.
165.
Rolling Stones released that hit.
I can't get no satisfaction.
You know, it was initially censored because it was deemed to be too sexually suggestive.
But if you actually read the lyrics, I mean the face hits the stone, so I'm sure that was in there, right?
But if you actually read the lyrics, it's really talking about commercialism.
Here's what it says.
I can't get no satisfaction when I'm watching my TV and a man comes on to tell me how white my shirt should be.
But he can't be a man because he doesn't smoke the same cigarettes as me.
You all remember the Marlboro man, right?
Real man, this is what they look like.
They've only got a smoke Marlboro's.
And he's saying, I'm trying to find some satisfaction in life and I can't find it.
When I turn my TV on, it says that to really be satisfied, I should use this detergent to get really white shirts.
But I'm not sure I can trust the guy who's telling me that because I don't think he's smoking marvellous.
And apparently you got to smoke the right cigarette to really be a fulfilled person and use the right detergent to really be a fulfilled person.
Whether you're a minority woman talking to an unusual rabbi,
or a member of the masses who got a free lunch from a miracle worker on a mountainside, or Keith Richards frustrated with a message on your TV and the relationships in your life, or the children of Israel grabbing at those unusual frosted flakes of manna on the ground.
The hunger, the thirst, the longing is the same.
We all long for satisfaction.
We want someone or something who can satisfy our deepest longings.
The problem is the things that we so often try to fill our longings with are things that don't last.
A good meal is only good for a few hours.
And then you find yourself hungry again.
Drink of water evaporates almost as quickly as it is drunk.
We've been going through the alpha course and there was a quote that came up a couple of weeks ago.
I thought I'd share with you from Jim Carrey, the comedian.
I think everybody should get rich and famous and do everything they ever dreamed of so they can see that it's not the answer.
I can't get no satisfaction.
The crowd pursuing Jesus for more miracle bread actually wanted more than just another meal.
John 6, 15, perceiving them, they were about to come and take him by force to make him king.
Jesus withdrew again to the mountain by himself.
Make him king.
A political solution.
We just need a strong leader who will set things in order, who will fix the system.
Talk about someplace where you can't get no satisfaction.
Who was ever satisfied with politicians?
But the crowd thinks certainly in that case Jesus for King would be a good idea.
He must be the best politician out there.
And yet Jesus hid.
Why?
Because he knew that their political solution was not the solution they truly needed.
It would not fix the greatest problem they had.
Looking to earthly kingdoms to satisfy our souls is like drinking salt water to satisfy your thirst.
The real problem isn't who is ruling your government, but rather who or what is ruling your heart.
What Jesus says to the crowd is that they don't need him to be up there in the halls of power.
He says, you need to have me in here.
You need to have a personal relationship with me.
It's at that point that Jesus makes the first of his seven great
I am statements, statements about who he was.
Jesus said to them, I am the bread of life.
Whoever comes to me shall not hunger, whoever believes in me shall never thirst.
And then comes the manna connection.
I am the living bread that came down from heaven.
He says, I'm the real manna.
You might look back to that daily miracle of frosted flakes and the wilderness that your ancestors enjoyed, but I want you to know that that was pointing to something else.
That was pointing to me.
And I am the true soul-satisfying bread that God has sent.
So how do we feed on this man and this bread from heaven?
What does that mean?
Well, I think it begins with an act of surrender and trust.
You remember that God has said there was a test embedded in the manna.
It was a trust test.
Would they believe that he would provide what they needed?
Would they give up trying to find contentment on their own terms?
See, when it comes to leaning on our own plans, our own priorities, there has to come a point for each one of us where we say, enough.
Enough trying to satisfy my deepest longings with things that keep coming up empty.
Enough telling myself the same lies or listening to the lies my culture keeps telling me that the next new thing, the next new relationship, the next new promotion, the next pay raise, the next, the next, the next is ever going to be enough.
Do we finally say I can't get no satisfaction
in all of those things that I've poured so much of my energy and time and priorities into.
And that's not just a word for those who have never yet chosen to follow Jesus.
In John's revelation, there are messages directed to seven different churches.
In essence, these are open letters to all churches, to all of God's people.
Here's the open letter that was addressed to the church at Ephesus.
I know your works, your toil, your patient endurance, but I have this against you.
that you have abandoned the love you had at first.
It says, you're good people, you're doing good things, and yet you're living with distracted hearts.
You love Jesus, but over time, other things have been permitted to take a greater tug on your affections.
See, Satan doesn't need us living in open rebellion.
His aims can be met just as well with distractions and misplaced priorities.
As long as our lives are wasted, that's all he cares about.
And he can keep us looking for something that won't truly satisfy.
He's got what he wants.
Every Israelite was on the greatest journey of their life.
They had been set free by a literal miracle of God's grace.
The fiery cloud, the manifestation of God's spirit was leading them.
They were being provided.
day by day with everything that they needed, that every reason to be satisfied people and yet.
Now the rabble that was among them had a strong craving.
And the people of Israel also wept again and said, oh, that we had meat to eat.
We remember the fish we eat in Egypt that cost nothing
The cucumbers, the melons, the leeks, the onions, the garlic, but now our strength is dried up and there's nothing at all but this manna to look at.
The rabble and their strong cravings.
They get already fired up and suddenly everybody is weeping.
Weeping.
Wow, remember the free food?
Oh, you could eat cucumbers.
Man, those were the good old days.
Now, it does leave out one tiny detail about free food, which was you do recall you were slaves.
There was a price attached to those things that you were craving.
Scripture talks about the things that can draw us aside.
It talks about the world, right?
The cultural influences around us, or the flesh, our own internal cravings, and the devil, our spiritual enemy, that try to convince us that our momentary cravings are essentials.
And at the same time, try to get us to ignore the price that those cravings made demand.
I love what they say, our strength is dried up.
Doesn't that just break your heart?
We are wasting away to nothing here, man.
We just got to have some free onions.
That would do it.
I was about 12 years old as I recall when my family had gone to Victoria and we had lunch at this restaurant.
The waitress came to our table and she heard me saying, I'm starving.
And her reply was, oh, you're not starving honey.
Now at the time it made me mad.
I felt as being disrespected here at the restaurant, you know?
But she was right.
My knees were fully met.
I was not starving.
What it was was a ploy to try and get my parents to give me something more that I wanted.
Exaggeration, catastrophizing, rationalizing.
Those are all things that we also easily fall prey to, to try and create a reason why we should get our cravings met.
I have to have this.
If I don't get this,
My strength is dried up.
I'm going to die if I don't get this."
You know, the rabble is still here, right?
The world, the flesh, the devil are still out there promoting cravings as essentials.
Years ago, I decided to quit subscribing to computer magazines.
I used to get several, and every issue was dedicated to convincing me
that what I already had was too old and too slow and too limited.
I needed to buy the next generation.
I needed more.
And man, I had all the rationalizations.
I had all the reasons.
I mean, I probably won't be able to work this week or get anything done if I don't get a new computer.
So I finally decided to stop taking the magazines because they just kept drawing me in to I got a half.
Of course, magazine subscriptions are so 1990.
And in the age of big data, there are massive companies who are analyzing every online click and swipe and targeting advertising to me that is directly tailored to the cravings it has identified in my life.
To try and make me believe that that is what I need for true fulfillment.
But it's not just big data centers that play on my cravings.
Scripture is clear.
We have a spiritual enemy who plays our cravings as well.
It's a game that goes back as far as the Garden of Eden.
Don't you know?
Did you eat that fruit?
You'll have more.
You'll be like, God.
And so that craving is awakened, and yet it was a lie.
Part of the lesson of manna was to teach the people daily dependence on God's provision
not to consume themselves with worry about tomorrow.
Another part was to teach the discipline of contentment.
They had all they needed, but not necessarily all that they wanted or craved.
Maybe you remember years ago, Keith Green had his album, so you want to go back to Egypt.
And it's all about his journey from Egypt.
And the key song, so you want to go back to Egypt, he rifts about the discontent that Israelites had from eating manna every day.
And he imagines all the ways that they might have served manna over 40 years.
Maybe you remember this.
Manna waffles, manna burgers, manna bagels, fillet of manna, manna patty, and then the crux of it all, bamana bread.
So how is your contentment?
Have you surrendered your discontent to Jesus?
Are you willing to gratefully receive what he provides?
What are the cucumbers that tempt you?
If we're gonna feed and satisfy our souls in Jesus, I think we have to take steps to stop filling our souls with junk food.
Don't fall for free cucumbers.
Second thing I would say is we need to be in his word.
Colossians chapter three says this, let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, teaching and admonishing one another in all wisdom, singing songs and hymns and spiritual songs with thankfulness in your hearts to God.
And whatever you do in word or deed, do everything in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through him.
And you notice that he encourages them to let the word of Christ dwell in them richly.
You should just dwell on that phrase for a little bit, but what does that mean to let God's word dwell in you richly?
It goes beyond just reading it.
Okay, that's kind of the Costco-free sample wave coming at God's word.
You know, just grab a bite, that seems interesting, and then moving on.
So don't let it dwell in you.
In fact, don't just study it.
You can study God's word in a very academic way, get lots of facts, and it hasn't really yet dwelt in you.
I think that's probably the reason why Jesus, when he instituted the Lord's Supper, he gave them something bread and a cup that they internalized.
He said, you need to internalize who I am, what I teach, my priorities, a walk with my spirit needs to become part of you.
Some people treat scripture like some kids play with food on their plate.
It's intriguing, they push it around, but they never actually take it in.
That Paul told his young friend Timothy that there were people who would be always learning and never able to come to a knowledge of the truth, just collecting facts, but it never actually becomes something that changes the way they live.
So here are some very practical suggestions.
First, I would say read.
You need to read God's word.
You're not going to get it just by osmosis, okay?
Holding your Bible in your hand or laying your hand on your phone app is not going to get God's word in your life.
You actually have to read it for yourself.
And what you might just do is pick a passage of Scripture and make it your passage of the week.
Again, I appreciate programs that try and get you to read through the Bible in a year.
Nothing wrong with that.
But if you've ever done it, you know that sometimes you're more intent on getting through today's assignment than you are actually
taking in what the word is saying.
You don't need to read even a whole chapter.
Pick a verse.
Read it.
Make it the verse for the week.
Write it down.
Post it where you can see it during the day.
Take a single verse and read the verses around it so you get the context.
If there's something that's hard for you to understand, we'll go find a commentary and check it out.
But read God's word.
or maybe some devotional literature would help you if you don't know where to start.
One of the things that we have available, speaking of manna, well devotional has been around for years.
New one comes out once a quarter called our daily bread.
Every day has a scripture, has a thought about it.
This is a great place to start.
If you don't have a daily discipline of being God's word, this will get you started.
First, there are a lot of apps on your phone that will help you with that.
You version if you go there has lots of devotional resources available Find a way to create that discipline like the children of Israel that were to collect manna every day All right, sometimes we get it backwards They were supposed to collect enough.
They didn't need to collect anything on the Sabbath Some of us just come to church once a week very well get everything we need for the week and move on from there It's sort of backwards.
He says daily being God's word the second thing I would say is pray
Ask the Holy Spirit to teach you as you meditate on a passage.
A third thing I would say is memorize.
Commit scripture to memory so it becomes part of you.
My wife is real musical.
Sometimes she has set scripture to music and sing it.
That's good for her.
For me, it might not be as edifying if I sing it.
But whatever it takes, bring God's word in so you can dwell on it.
Meditate.
Consider what the words have to teach you.
And jot down the thoughts that God begins to impress on your mind.
That's what I've been encouraging you to do in keeping this travel logs we go through is begin to write and think and pray through God's word.
The Israelites had to collect manna daily.
Our intentional engagement with Jesus needs to be a daily practice.
And do you see what's happening if you do this?
If you do this, you are chewing, you are thinking, you are internalizing, you are spiritually feeding on and being shaped by God's Word.
You are letting the Word dwell in you richly.
Next thing I would suggest is you need to be in fellowship.
You notice that Paul talks about all this in the context of one another.
Feeding on Christ is a group activity.
Whenever you see the Lord's table being observed in the New Testament, you see people sharing it together.
I'm convinced that's one of the things is key to the vitality of our church body that so many of you are in life groups.
You're in Bible study groups together.
You are helping each other to let the word dwell in you richly.
And then I would say we need to be in obedience.
The Lord told Moses that part of the man in part was a test to see if his people would obey him.
Jesus repeatedly said his true followers were people who both
occurred and obeyed his words.
Paul's counsel for believers to teach and admonish one another has that idea where we are together helping each other to grow up in Christ.
James said the real proof of those who claim to have faith is that they do the things that Jesus is asking them to do.
You know what the evidence was as to whether or not an Israelite who claimed faithful to God really was?
It was the kind of smell that was coming out of his tent.
You could tell it in 24 hours if he was doing what God had asked him to do.
If the neighbor's tent had the aroma of three-day old roadkill, it wasn't hard to figure out that maybe his words and his actions weren't lining up.
I must say there are a lot of people in this world
who are pretty turned off to Jesus because of the smells that come from the tents of some of the people that claim to be his followers.
The words they hear and the actions they see don't line up.
And that stink causes them to say, I don't want anything to do with that Jesus.
Obedience.
What smells are coming from your tent?
And then I'd say be in prayer.
Paul sees this constant river of Thanksgiving as being an important part of the Christian life rather than dwelling in and feasting on our complaints and our disappointments in a broken world.
To dwelling Christ means that we are engaging the discipline of thankfulness, which goes hand in hand with contentment, right?
Remember that the rabble out there in the wilderness and they're going, oh man,
Man, if we just had some free onions, some more cucumbers, man, then life would truly be great.
Instead of being thankful that God had provided for them in a place where they should have starved to death, their needs were met.
Instead of Thanksgiving, their lives became characterized by discontent and complaining.
Prayer is a place where we can begin to reign in those cravings and give thanks to God for what he has done for us.
One more observation on manna.
There was a day when the manna stopped coming.
Here's Joshua's account of what happened on the first Sabbath that was celebrated in Canaan, their journey's promised destination.
And the manna ceased the day after the eight of the produce of the land.
And there was no longer manna for the people of Israel, but they ate the fruit of the land of Canaan that year.
See, all through the long journey home, God had miraculously provided and sustained His people.
The wilderness they were in could never satisfy their deepest yearnings.
The manna sustained them and to have abandoned it for the cravings would have taken them back into slavery.
But the manna was not the goal.
It was simply the provision to get them home.
In Paul's first letter to the Corinthian church, he has a lot to say about the importance of love.
especially in chapter 13.
And to truly love Jesus said, summed up everything that Moses and the prophets had ever commanded.
To love God with all of your heart, soul, and being.
To love your neighbor as yourself.
And Paul doesn't deny in the slightest that God does miraculous things to sustain and guide his people.
But he emphasizes that greater than a miracle is a centrality of love in a Christian's life.
And he concludes his thoughts with these words.
Love never ends.
As for prophecies, they will pass away.
As for tongues, they will cease.
As for knowledge, it will pass away.
Talking about God's miraculous manifestations of power to the people.
He says, because when the perfect comes, the partial will pass away.
Now we see in the mirror dimly, but then face to face.
Now I know in part, then I shall know fully, even as I've been fully known.
So now the journey here, faith, hope, and love abide.
These three.
But the greatest of these is love.
Someday we won't need the manna of faith and hope because we will see Jesus face to face.
We will be in His presence.
But Paul says, man, the greatest of it all is love.
That people would see in our lives that we love God, that we are walking with Him.
And the one of the ways they would see it is because they see the love that comes out of us toward other people.
Let's pray.
Father, forgive us for
The many times that we set our eyes our affections on the free cucumbers of life.
We trade away the riches of contentment and life in you for the things that our world is putting in front of us that offer to make us fuller people, richer people, and yet come up empty every time.
Lord, I pray for any of my friends here today that have never yet entered into a relationship with you.
And I pray that you would open their hearts and eyes to see that in you are the things that they truly most deeply desire.
And for those of us who have started the journey of following you, Father forgive us for the places we've taken our eyes off of you.
Forgive us for the times that we have been discontented and not grateful.
Or give us hearts I pray full of thanks.
And may the aroma that comes out of our life be an aroma that is sweet.
that is attractive because people see our great love for you and our great love for them.
And I asked this in Jesus' powerful name.
Amen.